\section{Intel x86 Architecture}
Even though a more detailed familiarity with the subject is required for a full
understanding of the design and implementation of the Muen kernel, this section
only tries to give an short tour of the Intel x86 architecture. The interested
reader is directed to the Intel Software Developer's Manuals \cite{IntelSDM},
which contain a complete and in-depth description of the x86 architecture.

The basic components of a modern Intel x86 computer are depicted in figure
\ref{fig:intel-architecture}.

\begin{figure}
	\input{graph_intel_architecture}
	\caption{Intel architecture}
	\label{fig:intel-architecture}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Processor}
The main processor of the system is called the central processing unit (CPU). On
multi-processor systems a CPU can have multiple cores, which are termed
\emph{logical CPUs}. Each logical CPU fetches and executes instructions, which
change the state of the processor and the system.

A modern CPU provides several operating modes of which one is called
\emph{protected mode}. In this mode the processor provides different privilege
levels also called rings. The rings are numbered from 0 to 3, with ring 0 having
the most privileges. Due to common operating systems using only rings 0 and 3
and disregarding other privilege levels, the 64-bit extension to the Intel
architecture dropped support for rings 1 and 2.

Privileged instructions such as switching memory management data structures are
only executable in ring 0 also called supervisor mode. Operating systems such as
Linux, usually execute user applications in the unprivileged ring 3, called user
mode.

Current processors support management of physical memory through means of
segmentation and paging. Logical addresses are translated to linear addresses
using the segmentation mechanism. In a second step, linear addresses are
translated to physical addresses using paging.

Memory management is done in hardware by the memory management unit (MMU)
\index{MMU}. An operating system must set up certain data structures (descriptor
tables and page tables) to instruct the MMU how logic and linear memory
addresses map to physical memory. The MMU allows for partitioning and separation
of system memory.

A processor is connected to the memory controller hub via the system bus, which
is also called front side bus (FSB)\index{FSB}.

\subsection{Memory Controller Hub}
The memory controller hub (MCH)\index{MCH}, also called \emph{Northbridge},
connects the CPU to random access memory (RAM), the graphics card and
southbridge (presented in the next section) of the system. The processor
accesses these resources by sending memory requests via the system bus. The MCH
decodes the requests and forwards them to RAM or the Southbridge, depending on
the physical address. If for example a request contains an address of a
memory-mapped device, the chipset of the MCH forwards the request to the
Southbridge.

\subsection{Input/Output Controller Hub}
The input/ouput controller hub (ICH), also called \emph{Southbridge}, provides
connections to most devices and platform peripherals, such as keyboards, USB
connections and other buses such as PCI Express, USB etc. Newer models contain
an I/O memory management unit (IOMMU), which provides address translation
functionality similar to the MMU, but for accesses to system memory initiated by
I/O devices. This is necessary since active components, such as PCI devices, can
perform direct memory access (DMA)\index{DMA}, which bypasses the processor's
MMU memory protection. Like the MMU, an operating system must initialize data
structures and setup the IOMMU for proper separation of physical memory
accessible by devices.

\subsection{Platform Controller Hub}
More recently, Intel has rearranged the presented hub architecture and has
integrated much of the functionality provided by the Northbridge into the CPU.
All remaining functions of the north bridge and south bridge have been combined
and incorporated into a new component called the platform controller hub (PCH)
\index{PCH}. The is new architecture avoids the bottleneck presented by the
system bus connection between the CPU and the north bridge.
