\documentclass[a4paper,twoside]{report}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage{titlepic}
\usepackage[nottoc]{tocbibind}
\usepackage[dvipsnames]{xcolor}
\usepackage{listings}
\usepackage{url}
\usepackage{caption}
\usepackage{subcaption}
\usepackage{pgfgantt}
\usepackage{tikz}
\usetikzlibrary{positioning,shapes,shadows,arrows,fit,decorations.markings}
\usepackage{rotating}
\usepackage{tabu}
\usepackage{booktabs}
\usepackage{bytefield}
\usepackage{fancyhdr}
\pagestyle{fancy}
\usepackage{makeidx}
\makeindex
\usepackage[
	pdftitle={Muen},
	pdfsubject={A high assurance separation kernel for the Intel x86 architecture},
	pdfauthor={Reto Buerki, Adrian-Ken Rueegsegger},
	pdfkeywords={Separation Kernel, TCB, Virtualization, Intel VT-x, Security, SPARK},
	unicode=true,
	bookmarks=true,
	bookmarksnumbered=false,
	bookmarksopen=false,
	breaklinks=true,
	pdfborder={0 0 0},
	backref=false,
	colorlinks=false]{hyperref}

\lstset{
	basicstyle={\ttfamily\scriptsize},
	breakautoindent=true,
	breaklines=true,
	captionpos=b,
	extendedchars=true,
	frame=single,
	numbers=left,
	numberstyle={\tiny},
	showspaces=false,
	showstringspaces=false,
	tabsize=2,
	keywordstyle={\color{MidnightBlue}},
	commentstyle={\color{Aquamarine}},
	literate={~} {$\sim$}{1}
}

% Create new memory section (start, end, size, text).
\newcommand{\memsection}[4]{
	\bytefieldsetup{bitheight=#3\baselineskip} % define the height of the memsection
	\bitbox[]{10}{
		\footnotesize\texttt{0x#2} % print end address
		\\ \vspace{#3\baselineskip} \vspace{-2\baselineskip} \vspace{-#3pt}
		\footnotesize\texttt{0x#1} % print start address
	}
	\bitbox{16}{#4} % print box with caption
}

\title{Muen - A high assurance separation kernel for the Intel x86 architecture}
\author{Reto Buerki \and Adrian-Ken Rueegsegger}
\titlepic{\includegraphics[scale=0.4]{images/muen.pdf}}

\begin{document}
\input{tikzstyle}

\maketitle

University of Applied Sciences Rapperswil (HSR), Switzerland

\begin{abstract}
Microkernels are well suited as a basis of systems with high demands on
robustness. They are by definition small which is a precondition for rigorous
verification of correctness. Additionally they lend themselves to construction
of component-based systems where the misbehavior of one partition does not
impact the whole system. In contrast attaining high assurance for todayâ€™s
monolithic operating systems is exceptionally hard since they tend to be large
and have rich functionality. This fact is illustrated by regular security
updates provided by operating system vendors.

A separation kernel (SK) is a specialized microkernel which provides an
execution environment for multiple subjects which can only communicate according
to a given policy and are otherwise isolated from each other. Hereby the
isolation also includes the limitation of potential side- and covert channels.
SKs are generally more static and smaller than microkernels which minimizes the
possibility of kernel failure and should simplify the application of formal
verification techniques.

Even though the SK concept has garnered quite some attention from the research
community over the last thirty years no freely available SK exists to this date.
There are only a few commercial products but very little technical information
and none of the implementations are publicly available. Recent addition of
advanced hardware virtualization support (such as VT-x, VT-d and EPT) to the
Intel x86 architecture have the potential of greatly simplifying the
implementation of a separation kernel. This thesis presents a design of a
separation kernel for the Intel x86 architecture using the latest hardware
features. A SPARK based open-source prototype demonstrates the viability of the
envisioned concept.
\end{abstract}

\section*{Acknowledgments}
We would like to thank

\tableofcontents
\listoffigures
\lstlistoflistings

\include{introduction}
\include{background}
\include{design}
\include{implementation}
\include{conclusion}

\printindex{}

\bibliographystyle{plain}
\bibliography{report}

\end{document}
